Mnot refactor (#158)
ietf-wg-masque/draft-ietf-masque-h3-datagram: draft-ietf-masque-h3-datagram.md

--- abstract

This document describes HTTP Datagrams, a convention for conveying multiplexed,
potentially unreliable datagrams inside an HTTP connection.

In HTTP/3, HTTP Datagrams can be conveyed natively using the QUIC DATAGRAM
extension. When the QUIC DATAGRAM frame is unavailable or undesirable, they can
be sent using the Capsule Protocol, a more general convention for conveying data
in HTTP connections.

Both are intended for use by HTTP extensions, not applications.

--- middle

# Introduction {#intro}

HTTP extensions sometimes need to access underlying transport protocol features
such as unreliable delivery (as offered by {{!DGRAM=I-D.ietf-quic-datagram}})
to enable desirable features like an unreliable version of the CONNECT method,
and unreliable delivery in WebSockets {{?RFC6455}} (or its successors).

> In {{datagrams}}, this document describes HTTP Datagrams, a convention that
> associates non-content data with HTTP requests in order to support the
> bidirectional and possibly multiplexed exchange of datagrams inside an HTTP
> connection. They are intended for use by HTTP extensions (such as the CONNECT

Reviewer: 'non-content' raises a lot of questions. It might be better to be more direct, e.g.,

```suggestion
In {{datagrams}}, this document describes HTTP Datagrams, a convention that
supports the bidirectional and possibly multiplexed exchange of data inside an HTTP
connection. While HTTP datagrams are associated with HTTP requests, they are not 
part of message content; instead, they are intended for use by HTTP extensions (such as the CONNECT
```

Author: Fixed

method), and are compatible with all versions of HTTP. When the underlying
transport protocol supports unreliable delivery (such as when the QUIC DATAGRAM
extension is available in HTTP/3), they can use that capability.

It also describes the HTTP Capsule Protocol in {{capsule}}, to allow conveyance
of HTTP Datagrams when the QUIC DATAGRAM frame is unavailable or undesirable,
such as when earlier versions of HTTP are in use.

## Conventions and Definitions {#defs}

{::boilerplate bcp14-tagged}

# HTTP Datagrams {#datagrams}

HTTP Datagrams are a convention for conveying bidirectional and potentially
unreliable datagrams inside an HTTP connection, with multiplexing when
possible. All HTTP Datagrams are associated with an HTTP request.

> When HTTP Datagrams are conveyed on a HTTP/3 connection, the QUIC DATAGRAM

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When HTTP Datagrams are conveyed on an HTTP/3 connection, the QUIC DATAGRAM
```

frame can be used to achieve these goals, including unreliable delivery; see

> {{format}}. Negotiation is achieved using a SETTING; see {{setting}}.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{format}}. Negotiation is achieved using a setting; see {{setting}}.
```

lowercase, per https://quicwg.org/base-drafts/draft-ietf-quic-http.html#section-7.2.4

endpoints negotiate the same draft version.

## HTTP Datagrams using Capsules

> When HTTP/3 Datagrams are unavailable or undesirable, HTTP Datagrams can be sent
> using the Capsule Protocol, see {{datagram-capsule}}.

Reviewer 3: As we can also choose to send datagrams using capsules in HTTP/3, we should better talk about QUIC datagrams here. 
```suggestion
When QUIC Datagrams are unavailable or undesirable, HTTP Datagrams can be sent
using the Capsule Protocol, see {{datagram-capsule}}.
```

Reviewer 2: I'm open to changing this, but if we did it would be more consistent with the rest of the document to use QUIC DATAGRAM frame. So perhaps "If the use of QUIC DATAGRAM frames is not possible, or the use is undesirable, HTTP datagrams can be sent using the Capsule Protocol, see {{datagram-capsule}}"

Author: We define the concept of "HTTP/3 Datagrams" in this document, so I personally find that clearer.

Reviewer 3: I guess we should think twice about the sentence… re-considering the possibility to convert Datagram Capsules into HTTP/3 Datagrams over QUIC DATAGRAM frames, I guess we should keep HTTP/3 Datagrams here but strike the "or the use is undesirable" part as we can not prevent intermediaries from generating them anyway.

# Capsules {#capsule}

This specification introduces the Capsule Protocol. The Capsule Protocol is a

> sequence of type-length-value tuples that new HTTP Upgrade Tokens (see {{Section

Reviewer: See below re: focus on upgrade tokens. It's extensions that are choosing to use this mechanism, not the tokens themselves. They're just identifiers.

Author: Fixed

exchange HTTP Datagrams, which is necessary when HTTP is running over a
transport that does not support the QUIC DATAGRAM frame.

## HTTP Data Streams {#data-stream}

This specification defines the "data stream" of an HTTP request as the
bidirectional stream of bytes that follows the header section of the request
message and the final, successful (i.e., 2xx) response message.

In HTTP/1.x, the data stream consists of all bytes on the connection that follow
the blank line that concludes either the request header section, or the response
header section. As a result, only a single HTTP request starting the capsule
protocol can be sent on HTTP/1.x connections.

In HTTP/2 and HTTP/3, the data stream of a given HTTP request consists of all
bytes sent in DATA frames with the corresponding stream ID.

The concept of a data stream is particularly relevant for methods such as
CONNECT where there is no HTTP message content after the headers.

Data streams can be prioritized using any means suited to stream or request
prioritization. For example, see {{Section 11 of
?PRIORITY=I-D.ietf-httpbis-priority}}.

## The Capsule Protocol {#capsule-protocol}

> Definitions of new HTTP Upgrade Tokens can state that their data stream uses the

Reviewer: Use of 'data stream' here is confusing, as it's defined just above to be associated with a HTTP request. Who does 'their' refer to here?

Author: Fixed

> Capsule Protocol. If they do so, that means that the contents of their data

Reviewer: This is very abrupt; it assumes the reader knows that upgrade tokens can be encountered in the upgrade mechanism or extended CONNECT. The reader also has to assume the relationships therein -- e.g., if I define foo to use the Capsule Protocol, does it mean that it it'll use it whether the upgrade token is encountered in extended CONNECT or in Upgrade?

It might be better to NOT focus on upgrade tokens so much as the primary mechanism here and below; after all, they're just identifiers.

Author: Fixed by introducing what HTTP Upgrade tokens are when we first use the term

: The payload of this capsule. Its semantics are determined by the value of the
Capsule Type field.

> An intermediary can identify the use of the capsule protocol either through the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An intermediary can identify the use of the Capsule Protocol either through the
```

Author: Fixed

presence of the Capsule-Protocol header field ({{hdr}}) or by understanding the
chosen HTTP Upgrade token.

Because new protocols or extensions might define new capsule types,
intermediaries that wish to allow for future extensibility SHOULD forward
capsules without modification, unless the definition of the Capsule Type in use
specifies additional intermediary processing. One such Capsule Type is the
DATAGRAM capsule; see {{datagram-capsule}}.

> Endpoints which receive a Capsule with an unknown Capsule Type MUST silently

Reviewer: Use of the term 'endpoints' in the spec is a tiny bit sloppy - sometimes, it's referring to the transport-layer endpoints, others the HTTP endpoints (i.e., user agent and origin server). Here, I think it's the latter, but many transport-oriented readers may assume the former. Either paranthetically reminding readers or choosing different terms might help.

Author: Fixed by removing many instances of that word

## The Capsule-Protocol Header Field {#hdr}

The "Capsule-Protocol" header field is an Item Structured Field, see {{Section
3.3 of !STRUCT-FIELD=RFC8941}}; its value MUST be a Boolean; any other value

> type MUST be handled as if the field were not present by recipients. This

Reviewer: totally optional - see comment below.

```suggestion
type (including a List, such as when multiple field lines are sent) MUST be handled as if the field were not present by recipients. This
```

Author: Fixed

document does not define any parameters for the Capsule-Protocol header
field value, but future documents might define parameters. Receivers MUST ignore
unknown parameters.

Endpoints indicate that the Capsule Protocol is in use on a data stream by
sending a Capsule-Protocol header field with a true value. A Capsule-Protocol
header field with a false value has the same semantics as when the header is not
present.

Intermediaries MAY use this header field to allow processing of HTTP Datagrams
for unknown HTTP Upgrade Tokens; note that this is only possible for HTTP
Upgrade or Extended CONNECT.

> The Capsule-Protocol header field MUST NOT be sent multiple times on a message.

Reviewer: This is superfluous; it's a structured field, so what you really want to say (if anything) is that if its value isn't Boolean, it MUST be ignored (probably above). See suggestion above.

Author: Fixed

> The Capsule-Protocol header field MUST NOT be used on HTTP responses with a

Reviewer: What happens if one is received?

Author: Fixed

## The DATAGRAM Capsule {#datagram-capsule}

This document defines the DATAGRAM capsule type (see {{iana-types}} for the

> value of the capsule type). This capsule allows HTTP Datagram to be sent on a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
value of the capsule type). This capsule allows HTTP Datagrams to be sent on a
```

Is this a typo?
